README.md, before:

# Monocle

Monocle is designed for development teams to provide:

- analytics on project changes
- boards to display changes by criteria

It helps teams and individual to better organize daily duties
and to detect anomalies in the way changes are produced and reviewed.

Monocle supports GitHub, GitLab and Gerrit.

Explore the website and blog: [changemetrics.io website](https://changemetrics.io)

Try on the demo instance: [demo.changemetrics.io](https://demo.changemetrics.io)

Chat with us in the project Matrix room: [#monocle:matrix.org](https://matrix.to/#/#monocle:matrix.org)

## Screenshots of Monocle from the demo instance

The activity view:

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/change-metrics/monocle/assets/images/monocle-1.3.0/monocle-activity.png" width="70%" height="70%" />

The developer board:

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/change-metrics/monocle/assets/images/monocle-1.3.0/monocle-board.png" width="70%" height="70%" />

The peers strength view:

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/change-metrics/monocle/assets/images/monocle-1.3.0/monocle-peers-strength.png" width="70%" height="70%" />

## Installation

The process below describes how to index changes from GitHub repositories
and then how to start the web UI to browse metrics.

The deployment is based on Docker via a docker-compose definition.

### Clone and create the needed directories

```Shell
$ git clone https://github.com/change-metrics/monocle.git
$ cd monocle
$ git submodule update --init --recursive
$ echo CRAWLERS_API_KEY=$(uuidgen) > .secrets
$ ln -s docker-compose.yml.img docker-compose.yml
```

By default docker-compose will fetch the latest published container images.
Indeed, we produce Docker container images for the master version of Monocle.
If running master does not fit your needs, you could still use the last release
by setting the MONOCLE_VERSION to 1.3.0 in the .env file. Please refer
to [System configuration section](#system).

### Create the config.yaml file

The `config.yaml` file is used by the crawler and api services.

To crawl GitHub public repositories, you must generate a personal access
token on GitHub (w/o any specific rights) at https://github.com/settings/tokens.

Then create the config file `etc/config.yaml`. Here is an example your could start with.
Make sure to write `GITHUB_TOKEN=<github_token>` in the `.secrets` file:

```YAML
---
workspaces:
  - name: monocle
    crawlers:
      - name: github-tektoncd
        provider:
          github_organization: tektoncd
          github_repositories:
            - operator
            - pipeline
        update_since: '2021-01-01'
```

To crawl the full tektoncd GitHub organization then remove the `github_repositories` entry from the file.
Check the section [Workspaces](#workspaces) for a complete description of
the configuration.

### Start docker-compose

Start Monocle:

```ShellSession
$ docker-compose up -d
```

Ensure services are running:

```ShellSession
$ docker-compose ps
```

You might need to check the crawler logs to ensure the crawler started to fetch changes:

```ShellSession
$ docker-compose logs -f crawler
$ docker-compose logs -f crawler-legacy
```

You should be able to access the web UI at <http://localhost:8080>.

After a change in the configuration file, the crawler-legacy service need to be restarted:

```ShellSession
$ docker-compose restart crawler-legacy
```

## Configuration

### System

For a local deployment, default settings are fine.

The following settings are available in the `.env` file:

- `MONOCLE_PUBLIC_URL=<url>` to configure the public URL to access the UI and API.
  This is required for the github oauth redirection.
- `MONOCLE_VERSION=<version>` to use a specific version. By default it uses `latest`.
- `MONOCLE_TITLE=<title>` to change the title of the web application. By default it is `Monocle`.
- `ES_XMS and ES_XMX` to change the ElasticSearch JVM HEAP SIZE. By default 512m.
- `MONOCLE_WEB_ADDR` to change the IP address the web service will bind on. By default 0.0.0.0.
- `MONOCLE_WEB_PORT` to change the TCP port the web service will bind on. By default 8080.

### Workspaces

The Monocle configuration file defines workspaces. The file is used by the API and crawlers processes. The format of the file is YAML. You might want to use Dhall to manage it or to better
understand the schema ([dhall-monocle](https://github.com/change-metrics/dhall-monocle)).

A workspace uses a dedicated ElasticSearch index. A workspace defines:

- crawlers - [details](#crawlers)
- projects - [details](#projects-definition)
- identities - [details](#groups-definition)

#### Crawlers

Monocle provides two kinds of crawlers:

- Change: A crawler to fetch Changes proposed to a repository. Monocle supports Gerrit (Reviews), GitHub (Pull-Requests), GitLab (Merge-Requests).
- TaskData: A crawler to fetch task data related to a repository. Monocle supports GitHub (issues),
  and BugZilla (Bugs).

The `.secrets` file is used to store credentials and API keys used by crawlers to authenticate on providers.

The `crawlers` value is a list of crawler. Each crawler is composed of:

- `name`: an abitrary name used to identify the crawler.
- `update_since`: the crawler will fetch changes that has been created/updated since that date.
- `provider`: provider settings

```YAML
workspaces:
  - name: demo
    crawlers:
      - name: spinnaker
        update_since: "2020-01-01"
        provider: {}
```

##### Change

###### GitHub

A GitHub provider settings

```YAML
  provider:
    github_organization: spinnaker
    # Optional settings
    github_repositories:
      - pipeline
    github_url: https://github.com
    github_token: GITHUB_TOKEN
```

`github_organization` is the only mandatory key. If `github_repositories` is not specified then
the crawler will crawl the whole organization repositories. If specified then it will crawl only
the listed repositories. To crawl repositories from a personnal GitHub account, you need to set
`github_organization` to you account name and list repositories under the `github_repositories` key.

`github_url` might be specified in case of an alternate url. Default is "github.com".

`github_token` might be specified to use an alternate environment variable name to look for the
token value. Default is "GITHUB_TOKEN"

To crawl privates repositories, either you must use a [GitHub Application](#github-application)
or you must generate a Personal Access Token with the "repo" scope.

Note that this crawler is managed by the `crawler-legacy` container.

###### Gerrit

A Gerrit provider settings

```YAML
  provider:
    gerrit_url: https://review.opendev.org
    gerrit_repositories:
      - openstack/nova
      - openstack/neutron
    # Optional settings
    gerrit_login: monocle
    gerrit_password: GERRIT_PASSWORD
    gerrit_url_insecure: true
    gerrit_prefix: opendev/
```

`gerrit_url` is mandatory and must be the url of the Gerrit provider.
`gerrit_repositories` is mandatory and is the list of repositories from which the crawler will fetch Reviews from.

`gerrit_login` might be specified to authenticate on the provider API.
`gerrit_password`might be specified to use an alternate environment variable name to look for the
password. Default is "GERRIT_PASSWORD"

`gerrit_url_insecure` could be set to true to prevent HTTP certificate check.

`gerrit_prefix` might be set to configure the crawler to prepend the repository name with a prefix.

###### GitLab

A GitLab provider settings

```YAML
  provider:
    gitlab_organization: redhat/centos-stream/ci-cd/zuul
    # Optional settings
    gitlab_repositories:
      - jobs-config
    gitlab_url: https://gitlab.com/api/graphql
    gitlab_token: GITLAB_TOKEN
```

`gitlab_organization` is the only mandatory key. If `gitlab_repositories` is not specified then
the crawler will crawl the whole organization repositories. If specified then it will crawl only
the listed repositories.

`gitlab_url` might be specified in case of an alternate url. Default is "https://gitlab.com/api/graphql".

`gitlab_token` might be specified to use an alternate environment variable name to look for the
token value. Default is "GITLAB_TOKEN"

Note that this crawler is managed by the `crawler` container.

##### TaskData

Monocle provides additional crawlers to attach tasks/issues/RFEs to changes based on a
match on `change_url`. Then, Changes can be enhanced with information about related
tasks such as a `priority` or a `score`.

###### GitHub

The GitHub TaskData crawler run automatically whenever repositories are specified into a
[GitHub Changes crawler](#github) definition.

###### Bugzilla

A BugZilla provider settings

```YAML
  provider:
    bugzilla_url: https://redhat.bugzilla.com
    bugzilla_products:
      - Awesome product
    # Optional settings
    bugzilla_token: BUGZILLA_TOKEN
```

`bugzilla_product` must be specified. The crawler will crawl listed products for bugs that
contain an external bug references `ext_bz_bug_id`. The crawler assumes that the external
reference is used to link to a change (Pull-Request/Review).

`bugzilla_token` might be specified to use an alternate environment variable name to look for the
token value. Default is "BUGZILLA_TOKEN"

Note that this crawler is managed by the `crawler` container.

### Projects definition

Projects could be defined within a workspace configuration. A project is identified by a name and allows to set the following filter attributes:

- repository_regex
- branch_regex
- file_regex

Here is an example of configuration.

```YAML
workspaces:
  - name: example
    crawlers:
      - name: openstack
        provider:
          gerrit_url: https://review.opendev.org
          gerrit_repositories:
            - ^openstack/.*
        update_since: "2021-01-01"
    projects:
      - name: compute
        repository_regex: ".*nova.*"
      - name: compute-tests
        file_regex: "test[s]/.*"
        repository_regex: ".*nova.*"
      - name: deployment
        repository_regex: ".*tripleo.*|.*puppet.*|.*ansible.*"
        branch_regex: "master"
```

The monocle API endpoint `api/1/get_projects` can be queried to
retrieved the list defined projects for a given workspace. See the
[Monocle OpenAPI][monocle-openapi].

The monocle query endpoint handles the query parameter: `project`.

### Identity Management

Monocle is able to index changes from multiple code review systems. A contributor
might get different identities across code review systems. Thus Monocle provides
a configuration section to define aliases for contributors.

Let say a Monocle workspace is configured to fetch changes from github.com and
review.opendev.org (Gerrit) and we would like that John's metrics are merged under
the `John Doe` identity.

```YAML
workspaces:
  - name: example
    idents:
      - ident: John Doe
        aliases:
          - github.com/john-doe
          - review.opendev.org/John Doe/12345
    crawlers:
      - name: github-containers
        provider:
          github_organization: containers
          github_token: <github_token>
        update_since: '2000-01-01'

      - name: gerrit-opendev
        provider:
          gerrit_url: https://review.opendev.org
          gerrit_repositories:
            - ^openstack/.*
        update_since: '2000-01-01'
```

A contributor id on github.com or a GitHub enterprise instance is formated as `<domain>/<login>`.

A contributor id on a Gerrit instance is formated as `<domain>/<Full Name>/<gerrit-user-id>`.

### Groups definition

A group in Monocle permits to group authors of Changes and filter them from the web interface.

Group memberships are defined through the [idents](#identity-management) section of the configuration.

Here is an example:

```YAML
workspaces:
  - name: example
    idents:
      - ident: John Doe
        aliases:
          - github.com/john-doe
          - review.opendev.org/John Doe/12345
        groups:
          - devs
      - ident: Jane Doe
        aliases:
          - github.com/jane-doe
        groups:
          - devs
          - ptl
```

#### Apply idents configuration

Database objects must be updated to reflect the configuration. Once `config.yaml` is updated, run the following commands:

```bash
docker-compose restart crawler-legacy
docker-compose run --rm --no-deps api monocle janitor update-idents --elastic elastic:9200 --config /etc/monocle/config.yaml
```

### Full configuration file example

Here are the expected environment variables that need to be added to the `.secrets` file:

- `CRAWLERS_API_KEY`: an arbitrary api key used by the crawler to index data.
- `GITHUB_TOKEN`: an API key for GitHub crawler.
- `GITLAB_TOKEN`: an API key for GitLab crawler.

Open the sample [config.yaml](haskell/test/data/config.yaml).

#### Troubleshooting

ElasticSearch could need some capabilities to run in container
mode. Take a look at the logs to see if it started correctly:

```ShellSession
$ docker-compose logs elastic
```

For example, you could need to increase this system parameter:

```ShellSession
$ sudo sysctl -w vm.max_map_count=262144
```

or make the data directory writable for other:

```ShellSession
$ chmod o+w data
```

To delete a workspace (a workspace is an elasticsearch index):

```ShellSession
# List indexes with:
docker-compose run --rm --no-deps api curl http://elastic:9200/_aliases?pretty=true
# Delete an index with
docker-compose run --rm --no-deps api curl -XDELETE http://elastic:9200/<index-name>
```

ElasticSearch sets defaults settings on new indexes. The default setting for queries based
on regex is set to a value that might not fit your usage especially when your project definitions
uses regex above that limit. However the limit could be increased using the following command:

```ShellSession
docker-compose run --rm --no-deps api curl \
-XPUT http://localhost:9200/monocle.changes.1.<index-name>/_settings \
-H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"index": {"max_regex_length": 50000}}'
```

## Components

![architecture](./doc/architecture.png)

Monocle is composed of the following services:

1. an Elasticsearch data store.
2. an api service to perform user query and index crawler output.
3. a crawler service to retrieve change from provider.
4. a web proxy and web application to browse metrics.

The APIs are defined using [protobuf][monocle-protobuf] and served over HTTP through [Monocle OpenAPI][monocle-openapi].

Some legacy component are still required until they are migrated to the new OpenAPI (see the related [topic](https://github.com/change-metrics/monocle/labels/legacy)):

5. a crawler service to index github and gerrit changes.


## Monitoring

To setup the monitoring:

1. Create the prometheus service by providing the API and CRAWLER location

```ShellSession
export API_TARGET=localhost:9879
export CRAWLER_TARGET=localhost:9001
mkdir -p /srv/prometheus
podman create --network host -v /srv/prometheus:/var/lib/prometheus:Z -e API_TARGET=${API_TARGET} -e CRAWLER_TARGET=${CRAWLER_TARGET} --name monocle-prometheus quay.io/change-metrics/monocle-prometheus:latest
```

2. Create the grafana service (on the prometheus host)

```ShellSession
mkdir -p /srv/grafana
podman create --network host -v /srv/grafana:/var/lib/grafana:Z -e GRAFANA_PASS=secret --name monocle-grafana quay.io/change-metrics/monocle-grafana:latest
```

3. Starts the services with systemd

```ShellSession
mkdir -p ~/.config/systemd/user/
for service in prometheus grafana; do podman generate systemd -n monocle-$service > ~/.config/systemd/user/monocle-$service.service; done
systemctl --user daemon-reload
for service in prometheus grafana; do systemctl --user start monocle-$service; done
```

4. Check metrics with grafana dashboard at http://localhost:19030/ (login with 'admin:secret')

## Contributing

Follow [our contributing guide](CONTRIBUTING.md).

[monocle-protobuf]: ./protos/monocle
[monocle-openapi]: ./doc/openapi.yaml

Commit message:

[Readme] removed references to crawler-legacy

README.md, after:

# Monocle

Monocle is designed for development teams to provide:

- analytics on project changes
- boards to display changes by criteria

It helps teams and individual to better organize daily duties
and to detect anomalies in the way changes are produced and reviewed.

Monocle supports GitHub, GitLab and Gerrit.

Explore the website and blog: [changemetrics.io website](https://changemetrics.io)

Try on the demo instance: [demo.changemetrics.io](https://demo.changemetrics.io)

Chat with us in the project Matrix room: [#monocle:matrix.org](https://matrix.to/#/#monocle:matrix.org)

## Screenshots of Monocle from the demo instance

The activity view:

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/change-metrics/monocle/assets/images/monocle-1.3.0/monocle-activity.png" width="70%" height="70%" />

The developer board:

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/change-metrics/monocle/assets/images/monocle-1.3.0/monocle-board.png" width="70%" height="70%" />

The peers strength view:

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/change-metrics/monocle/assets/images/monocle-1.3.0/monocle-peers-strength.png" width="70%" height="70%" />

## Installation

The process below describes how to index changes from GitHub repositories
and then how to start the web UI to browse metrics.

The deployment is based on Docker via a docker-compose definition.

### Clone and create the needed directories

```Shell
$ git clone https://github.com/change-metrics/monocle.git
$ cd monocle
$ git submodule update --init --recursive
$ echo CRAWLERS_API_KEY=$(uuidgen) > .secrets
$ ln -s docker-compose.yml.img docker-compose.yml
```

By default docker-compose will fetch the latest published container images.
Indeed, we produce Docker container images for the master version of Monocle.
If running master does not fit your needs, you could still use the last release
by setting the MONOCLE_VERSION to 1.3.0 in the .env file. Please refer
to [System configuration section](#system).

### Create the config.yaml file

The `config.yaml` file is used by the crawler and api services.

To crawl GitHub public repositories, you must generate a personal access
token on GitHub (w/o any specific rights) at https://github.com/settings/tokens.

Then create the config file `etc/config.yaml`. Here is an example your could start with.
Make sure to write `GITHUB_TOKEN=<github_token>` in the `.secrets` file:

```YAML
---
workspaces:
  - name: monocle
    crawlers:
      - name: github-tektoncd
        provider:
          github_organization: tektoncd
          github_repositories:
            - operator
            - pipeline
        update_since: '2021-01-01'
```

To crawl the full tektoncd GitHub organization then remove the `github_repositories` entry from the file.
Check the section [Workspaces](#workspaces) for a complete description of
the configuration.

### Start docker-compose

Start Monocle:

```ShellSession
$ docker-compose up -d
```

Ensure services are running:

```ShellSession
$ docker-compose ps
```

You might need to check the crawler logs to ensure the crawler started to fetch changes:

```ShellSession
$ docker-compose logs -f crawler
```

You should be able to access the web UI at <http://localhost:8080>.

## Configuration

### System

For a local deployment, default settings are fine.

The following settings are available in the `.env` file:

- `MONOCLE_PUBLIC_URL=<url>` to configure the public URL to access the UI and API.
  This is required for the github oauth redirection.
- `MONOCLE_VERSION=<version>` to use a specific version. By default it uses `latest`.
- `MONOCLE_TITLE=<title>` to change the title of the web application. By default it is `Monocle`.
- `ES_XMS and ES_XMX` to change the ElasticSearch JVM HEAP SIZE. By default 512m.
- `MONOCLE_WEB_ADDR` to change the IP address the web service will bind on. By default 0.0.0.0.
- `MONOCLE_WEB_PORT` to change the TCP port the web service will bind on. By default 8080.

### Workspaces

The Monocle configuration file defines workspaces. The file is used by the API and crawlers processes. The format of the file is YAML. You might want to use Dhall to manage it or to better
understand the schema ([dhall-monocle](https://github.com/change-metrics/dhall-monocle)).

A workspace uses a dedicated ElasticSearch index. A workspace defines:

- crawlers - [details](#crawlers)
- projects - [details](#projects-definition)
- identities - [details](#groups-definition)

#### Crawlers

Monocle provides two kinds of crawlers:

- Change: A crawler to fetch Changes proposed to a repository. Monocle supports Gerrit (Reviews), GitHub (Pull-Requests), GitLab (Merge-Requests).
- TaskData: A crawler to fetch task data related to a repository. Monocle supports GitHub (issues),
  and BugZilla (Bugs).

The `.secrets` file is used to store credentials and API keys used by crawlers to authenticate on providers.

The `crawlers` value is a list of crawler. Each crawler is composed of:

- `name`: an abitrary name used to identify the crawler.
- `update_since`: the crawler will fetch changes that has been created/updated since that date.
- `provider`: provider settings

```YAML
workspaces:
  - name: demo
    crawlers:
      - name: spinnaker
        update_since: "2020-01-01"
        provider: {}
```

##### Change

###### GitHub

A GitHub provider settings

```YAML
  provider:
    github_organization: spinnaker
    # Optional settings
    github_repositories:
      - pipeline
    github_url: https://github.com
    github_token: GITHUB_TOKEN
```

`github_organization` is the only mandatory key. If `github_repositories` is not specified then
the crawler will crawl the whole organization repositories. If specified then it will crawl only
the listed repositories. To crawl repositories from a personnal GitHub account, you need to set
`github_organization` to you account name and list repositories under the `github_repositories` key.

`github_url` might be specified in case of an alternate url. Default is "github.com".

`github_token` might be specified to use an alternate environment variable name to look for the
token value. Default is "GITHUB_TOKEN"

To crawl privates repositories, either you must use a [GitHub Application](#github-application)
or you must generate a Personal Access Token with the "repo" scope.

###### Gerrit

A Gerrit provider settings

```YAML
  provider:
    gerrit_url: https://review.opendev.org
    gerrit_repositories:
      - openstack/nova
      - openstack/neutron
    # Optional settings
    gerrit_login: monocle
    gerrit_password: GERRIT_PASSWORD
    gerrit_url_insecure: true
    gerrit_prefix: opendev/
```

`gerrit_url` is mandatory and must be the url of the Gerrit provider.
`gerrit_repositories` is mandatory and is the list of repositories from which the crawler will fetch Reviews from.

`gerrit_login` might be specified to authenticate on the provider API.
`gerrit_password`might be specified to use an alternate environment variable name to look for the
password. Default is "GERRIT_PASSWORD"

`gerrit_url_insecure` could be set to true to prevent HTTP certificate check.

`gerrit_prefix` might be set to configure the crawler to prepend the repository name with a prefix.

###### GitLab

A GitLab provider settings

```YAML
  provider:
    gitlab_organization: redhat/centos-stream/ci-cd/zuul
    # Optional settings
    gitlab_repositories:
      - jobs-config
    gitlab_url: https://gitlab.com/api/graphql
    gitlab_token: GITLAB_TOKEN
```

`gitlab_organization` is the only mandatory key. If `gitlab_repositories` is not specified then
the crawler will crawl the whole organization repositories. If specified then it will crawl only
the listed repositories.

`gitlab_url` might be specified in case of an alternate url. Default is "https://gitlab.com/api/graphql".

`gitlab_token` might be specified to use an alternate environment variable name to look for the
token value. Default is "GITLAB_TOKEN"

##### TaskData

Monocle provides additional crawlers to attach tasks/issues/RFEs to changes based on a
match on `change_url`. Then, Changes can be enhanced with information about related
tasks such as a `priority` or a `score`.

###### GitHub

The GitHub TaskData crawler run automatically whenever repositories are specified into a
[GitHub Changes crawler](#github) definition.

###### Bugzilla

A BugZilla provider settings

```YAML
  provider:
    bugzilla_url: https://redhat.bugzilla.com
    bugzilla_products:
      - Awesome product
    # Optional settings
    bugzilla_token: BUGZILLA_TOKEN
```

`bugzilla_product` must be specified. The crawler will crawl listed products for bugs that
contain an external bug references `ext_bz_bug_id`. The crawler assumes that the external
reference is used to link to a change (Pull-Request/Review).

`bugzilla_token` might be specified to use an alternate environment variable name to look for the
token value. Default is "BUGZILLA_TOKEN"

Note that this crawler is managed by the `crawler` container.

### Projects definition

Projects could be defined within a workspace configuration. A project is identified by a name and allows to set the following filter attributes:

- repository_regex
- branch_regex
- file_regex

Here is an example of configuration.

```YAML
workspaces:
  - name: example
    crawlers:
      - name: openstack
        provider:
          gerrit_url: https://review.opendev.org
          gerrit_repositories:
            - ^openstack/.*
        update_since: "2021-01-01"
    projects:
      - name: compute
        repository_regex: ".*nova.*"
      - name: compute-tests
        file_regex: "test[s]/.*"
        repository_regex: ".*nova.*"
      - name: deployment
        repository_regex: ".*tripleo.*|.*puppet.*|.*ansible.*"
        branch_regex: "master"
```

The monocle API endpoint `api/1/get_projects` can be queried to
retrieved the list defined projects for a given workspace. See the
[Monocle OpenAPI][monocle-openapi].

The monocle query endpoint handles the query parameter: `project`.

### Identity Management

Monocle is able to index changes from multiple code review systems. A contributor
might get different identities across code review systems. Thus Monocle provides
a configuration section to define aliases for contributors.

Let say a Monocle workspace is configured to fetch changes from github.com and
review.opendev.org (Gerrit) and we would like that John's metrics are merged under
the `John Doe` identity.

```YAML
workspaces:
  - name: example
    idents:
      - ident: John Doe
        aliases:
          - github.com/john-doe
          - review.opendev.org/John Doe/12345
    crawlers:
      - name: github-containers
        provider:
          github_organization: containers
          github_token: <github_token>
        update_since: '2000-01-01'

      - name: gerrit-opendev
        provider:
          gerrit_url: https://review.opendev.org
          gerrit_repositories:
            - ^openstack/.*
        update_since: '2000-01-01'
```

A contributor id on github.com or a GitHub enterprise instance is formated as `<domain>/<login>`.

A contributor id on a Gerrit instance is formated as `<domain>/<Full Name>/<gerrit-user-id>`.

### Groups definition

A group in Monocle permits to group authors of Changes and filter them from the web interface.

Group memberships are defined through the [idents](#identity-management) section of the configuration.

Here is an example:

```YAML
workspaces:
  - name: example
    idents:
      - ident: John Doe
        aliases:
          - github.com/john-doe
          - review.opendev.org/John Doe/12345
        groups:
          - devs
      - ident: Jane Doe
        aliases:
          - github.com/jane-doe
        groups:
          - devs
          - ptl
```

#### Apply idents configuration

Database objects must be updated to reflect the configuration. Once `config.yaml` is updated, run the following commands:

```bash
docker-compose restart crawler-legacy
docker-compose run --rm --no-deps api monocle janitor update-idents --elastic elastic:9200 --config /etc/monocle/config.yaml
```

### Full configuration file example

Here are the expected environment variables that need to be added to the `.secrets` file:

- `CRAWLERS_API_KEY`: an arbitrary api key used by the crawler to index data.
- `GITHUB_TOKEN`: an API key for GitHub crawler.
- `GITLAB_TOKEN`: an API key for GitLab crawler.

Open the sample [config.yaml](haskell/test/data/config.yaml).

#### Troubleshooting

ElasticSearch could need some capabilities to run in container
mode. Take a look at the logs to see if it started correctly:

```ShellSession
$ docker-compose logs elastic
```

For example, you could need to increase this system parameter:

```ShellSession
$ sudo sysctl -w vm.max_map_count=262144
```

or make the data directory writable for other:

```ShellSession
$ chmod o+w data
```

To delete a workspace (a workspace is an elasticsearch index):

```ShellSession
# List indexes with:
docker-compose run --rm --no-deps api curl http://elastic:9200/_aliases?pretty=true
# Delete an index with
docker-compose run --rm --no-deps api curl -XDELETE http://elastic:9200/<index-name>
```

ElasticSearch sets defaults settings on new indexes. The default setting for queries based
on regex is set to a value that might not fit your usage especially when your project definitions
uses regex above that limit. However the limit could be increased using the following command:

```ShellSession
docker-compose run --rm --no-deps api curl \
-XPUT http://localhost:9200/monocle.changes.1.<index-name>/_settings \
-H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"index": {"max_regex_length": 50000}}'
```

## Components

![architecture](./doc/architecture.png)

Monocle is composed of the following services:

1. an Elasticsearch data store.
2. an API service to serve user and crawler requests.
3. a crawler service to retrieve change from providers.
4. a web proxy and web application as a frontend for users.

The APIs are defined using [protobuf][monocle-protobuf] and served over HTTP through [Monocle OpenAPI][monocle-openapi].

## Monitoring

To setup the monitoring:

1. Create the prometheus service by providing the API and CRAWLER location

```ShellSession
export API_TARGET=localhost:9879
export CRAWLER_TARGET=localhost:9001
mkdir -p /srv/prometheus
podman create --network host -v /srv/prometheus:/var/lib/prometheus:Z -e API_TARGET=${API_TARGET} -e CRAWLER_TARGET=${CRAWLER_TARGET} --name monocle-prometheus quay.io/change-metrics/monocle-prometheus:latest
```

2. Create the grafana service (on the prometheus host)

```ShellSession
mkdir -p /srv/grafana
podman create --network host -v /srv/grafana:/var/lib/grafana:Z -e GRAFANA_PASS=secret --name monocle-grafana quay.io/change-metrics/monocle-grafana:latest
```

3. Starts the services with systemd

```ShellSession
mkdir -p ~/.config/systemd/user/
for service in prometheus grafana; do podman generate systemd -n monocle-$service > ~/.config/systemd/user/monocle-$service.service; done
systemctl --user daemon-reload
for service in prometheus grafana; do systemctl --user start monocle-$service; done
```

4. Check metrics with grafana dashboard at http://localhost:19030/ (login with 'admin:secret')

## Contributing

Follow [our contributing guide](CONTRIBUTING.md).

[monocle-protobuf]: ./protos/monocle
[monocle-openapi]: ./doc/openapi.yaml
